[Music]
so we're going to discuss some very
rough things today um maybe you're
somewhat accustomed to that already but
this is particularly brutal I think um
I'm going to tell talk to you about a
body of research that's been produced
over about the last 10 years and I think
it it's per perhaps it's it's a body of
research that might outline some of the
most important things that psychologists
have ever discovered it's really changed
my view for example on what happened in
Nazi Germany which we're going to talk
about a lot today and you know we've
already talked a fair bit about the
temperamental determinance of political
belief right and I've made a case for
you
that people who are liberal or lean to
the left tend to be high in trade
openness and low in trait
conscientiousness especially orderliness
and people on the right tend to be low
in openness and high in
conscientiousness especially orderliness
and the effect is not trivial if you
look at just voting behavior then you
get the typical sort of effect sizes
that are characteristic of Personality
research. 2 to point4 something like
that correlations but if you start to
analyze people's political beliefs in
detail so so you get your measurement up
to the point where it's nice and
reliable and nice and valid then
temperament uh accounts for a
substantial a substantially higher
proportion of the the variance and so a
lot of what people seem to do is one
thing you could think of is that they
they they they politicize their
temperament by constructing post Hawk
arguments about the way the world is but
it's deeper than that you see because we
already know that you have to use
filtering mechanisms in order to orient
yourself in the world right because the
world is just too complicated for you to
orient yourself without using filtering
mechanisms and the question is well what
are the filtering mechanisms and to a
large degree they're your temperamental
proclivities because they set up your
value structure for example and that
sets up your perceptual frame and so
what that means is that you screen the
world at the level of the facts that
display themselves to you because you
know you could say well you're a
dispassionate Observer of the universe
of facts and that you extract out the
conclusions that a reasonable person
would extract out from that body of
facts but unfortunately that's not the
case because your perceptions are biased
by your temperament and they have to be
because well because you have to screen
things and so you screen things in
accordance with your temperament you
know you're oriented towards certain
things in the world certain values for
example and that's a perfectly that's
perfectly reasonable because you can't
do everything at once anyways so there's
no reason for you not to be directional
the question is what are the pathologies
associated with directionality now
conscientiousness is a very
interesting um uh trait in relationship
to that because there are obvious
benefits to being conscientious right I
mean it's the best long-term predictor
of job uh performance for example and
and I'll outline some other data that
might be more associated with
industriousness than orderliness but
there's utility to orderliness as well
um and and we'll cover that in detail
today the question is no the issue is
that you never get a benefit without a
price and so you can see that with
agreeableness if you're agreeable high
in agreeableness then you're
compassionate and poite and you're
empathic and you can work well in teams
but the price you pay for that is that
you don't negotiate very well on your
own behalf and that you can be easily
taken advantage of and then if you're
very low in agreeableness well then
you're more competitive and more out to
win I would say but the price you pay
for that is that if you become too
disagreeable then you're likely to be
sufficiently antisocial let's say so
that you might end up in prison so you
don't get a cost without a benefit you
don't get a benefit without a cost so
then the question might be well what's
up with conscientiousness because it
seems all things considered that it
would be a good thing to be
conscientious now I can think of some
exceptions to that so conscientious
people are dutiful industrious orderly
that sort of
thing and they tend to sacrifice the
present for the future and that's a good
thing so you you you save up let's say
you save up wealth you save up labor and
effort for the future you know uh don't
live for today don't be impulsive work
hard and all that that'll acrew you
success over the long run the downside
of that
is the long run has to be stable in
order for that to be a reasonable
strategy and so conscientiousness is not
a good strategy at least under some
conditions in situations that are
radically unstable because in situations
that are radically unstable you might as
well get where you can now or that's one
way of looking at it anyways the other
thing about being conscientious if you
store up wealth say as a consequence of
hard work then that can make you targets
for people who would like to come and
take your wealth and so um it it's also
one of the things that happened to many
people in the 20th century most recently
in in Venezuela is that let's say you're
conscientious and you save money well
what happens in a period of
hyperinflation well your money's wiped
out and so you know this happened to
Germany say in the 1920s and you got to
understand what hyperinflation does to a
society
because what hyperinflation does is
destroy the people who worked hardest to
construct the society because they're
the people who' have been prudent and
careful and sacrificed and so forth and
then when a period of high inflation
comes along poof everything they have
disappears and that happened in Germany
during the 1920s now there was a bunch
of reasons for that but so Germany was
very unstable in the 1920s right because
of the war had just ended they they had
um been subjected to the Versa treaty
which was a very punitive treaty aimed
against Germany that it's not like the
Allies had
lacked reasons to impose a punitive
treaty but nonetheless they did Germany
lost a lot of territory including their
industrial uh including their industrial
areas Germany was flooded by men who
were brutalized in the trenches in World
War I I mean you could hardly imagine
how terrible trench warfare is and you
can't imagine what you'd be like after a
month of that a day of that let alone a
couple of years of that and then Germany
underwent a period of hyperinflation at
the same time in the Soviet Union the
Comm Comm revolution had had been
successful and so there was tremendous
political upheaval in Germany during the
1920s as well I I want to just set the
stage for that and so but the
hyperinflation wiped out all the people
that
were prudent and saved and left them
with a terrible sense that the entire
system had betrayed them which is of
course exactly what had happened so all
right so anyways conscientiousness is a
bit of a mystery you know we've looked
at plasticity right
already um that's a combination of
extroversion and openness I just want to
walk you through again where
conscientiousness is located in the big
five space so plasticity is a
combination of extroversion and openness
and then stability is a combination of
conscientiousness emotional stability
and agreeableness and conscientiousness
is made out of industriousness and
orderliness now here's here's some
markers for for conscientiousness so
here's what you're like if you're
orderly or if you're industrious you
carry out your plans you don't waste
time you don't find it difficult ult to
get down to work you don't mess things
up you finish what you start you put
your mind on the task at hand you get
things done quickly you know what you're
doing you don't postpone decisions and
you're not easily distracted that's what
an industrious person is like we don't
know anything about industrious people
we cannot figure out why they're
industrious if you read the
neuropsychological literature you might
assume that people who have highly
functioning prefrontal cortexes might be
more conscientious because people
associate the prefrontal cortex with
such things has the capacity to plan the
problem with that is that we've for
example tested now thousands of people
using tests of dorsal lateral prefrontal
cognitive ability which are basically
cognitive tests and as you know from
being in this class if you take a
battery of cognitive tests and you
subject them to a factor analysis you
can extract out a first factor and
that's fluid intelligence and the
correlation between fluid intelligence
and conscientiousness is zero right so
so that's that's very very strange
because you would tend to think that
people who were smarter might be better
at planning and maybe they are but
they're not necessarily better at
implementing and that that's a and we
don't understand the difference between
planning and implementation we we don't
know what that is um you got to think
about it this way too though just
because you're better at planning
wouldn't necessarily imply that you're
better at implementing because actually
one of the prerequisites for thinking
abstractly is that you can detach your
plans from your action right because
otherwise you just automatically Ally
act out everything you planned but that
isn't what people do they separate out
their thinking so that they can work in
an abstract space that's divorced from
their action and so they can lay out
multiple plans without necessarily
acting them out but then that introduces
the additional complication of having to
implement and industrious people seem to
be good at implementation but we don't
know why we've done all sorts of
laboratory studies trying to see if we
could get some sort of laboratory task
that industrious people would do better
in the lab the non- industrious people
God you'd think that would be a a snap
we we've probably tested 50 things and
have never got anything differences in
language use is as close as we've got
you can extract out estimates of
people's conscientiousness or their
industriousness from the way they use
language but that's not a lot different
than using self-report personality
scills it's different but it's not a lot
different so we've done things for
example like imagine we present people
with a row of uh H's n's M's and U's row
after row of letters small type you say
go through and circle all the U's well
obviously you would think that that
would be a task that would require
diligence and industriousness you could
time how long it took people to do it
you could see how accurate they were
correlation with conscientiousness
nothing zero it's an IQ task as it turns
out and so the best we've been able to
do so far maybe with industriousness is
and this is so vague it's embarrassing
um
is that we think that maybe industrious
people find inactivity
aversive so because they're not
motivated by enthusiasm right for the
task that would be an extrovert and
they're not motivated by intrinsic
interest in the task that would be
someone who was open and they're not
motivated by the desire to decrease
anxiety or emotional pain because that
would be someone who's high in
neuroticism right and they're not
motivated by the desire to Foster
affiliative relationships or to compete
because that looks like it loads on
agreeableness it's something else it
does a good job of predicting military
prowess for example we we we tested a
number of people who worked in the US
military in a number of different places
conscientiousness was a deadly predictor
of of of ranking in military performance
in schools like the US Naval Academy for
example and also on on military bases
themselves and that kind of makes sense
I mean the military is a conservative
place you'd expect people who were
conscientious and dutiful to do better
in a place like that but so they're good
at they're good at implementation
they're good at following orders they're
good at at doing their Duty now we're
starting to understand a little bit
about the value concerns that
conscientious people would have too and
so let's go through orderliness so you
can decide whether you're orderly or
disorderly leave your belongings around
that you're disorderly obviously if you
do that like order well that's a that's
a no-brainer keep things tidy follow a
schedule is bothered is is bothered by
messy people once everything to be just
right is bothered by disorder likes
routine sees that rules are observed and
wants every detail taken care of you can
imagine all sorts of occupations where
that would be useful accounting for
example or there are people who go
around and check uh you know natural gas
fittings and that s sort of thing by a
checklist and you know you want someone
like that every in any any position
where careful attention to detail is
absolutely vital um the question is as
we said before what what's the potential
downside so with industriousness we
don't know anything about
it here's the problem with
conscientiousness okay broadly speaking
there's no theoretical model nobody has
any idea why people are conscientious
except for the few things that I've told
you there's no neuros pychological model
because the prediction would be
something like people who are higher in
prefrontal cortical ability because
that's associated with planning would be
more conscientious that's not true
there's no psychological model and
that's partly because
conscientiousness as a trait was
extracted out of the linguistic pools
that we described by Factor analytic
processes nobody predicted that that
would emerge as a fundamental trait it
just came out of the statistics so there
was no there's no model surrounding it
really and there's no pharmacological
model we don't know how to make people
more conscientious with the possible
exception of drugs like rlin
amphetamines you know that that seem to
be able to make people focus in more and
so maybe there's an association to some
degree
between conscientiousness and the
ability to pay attention but when we've
used attentional tasks in the lab first
of all they load on fluid intelligence
and second they don't correlate with
conscientiousness there's another dead
end very very difficult to for it's a
real mystery to me because we don't have
that many good predictors of Life
outcome IQ that's a good one
conscientiousness that's a good one well
what's
conscientiousness well we don't know we
don't know anything about it with the
exception of the things I told you and
I'm going to describe some of the other
things that we found out more recently
so okay so what else is useful about
conscientiousness well it's strongly
related to life satisfaction and
happiness actually if you look at the
big five if you look at the traits that
are most correlated within the big five
conscientiousness and neuroticism are
negatively correlated make sure I got
that right the more conscientious you
are the less likely you are to suffer
from anxiety and emotional pain and I
think the reason for that but I don't
know but I think the reason for that is
that by being conscientious you
stabilize your environment right because
everything becomes more predictable more
scheduled more routine you're more
likely to be successful so if things
aren't going wrong around you all the
time then you're going to be less
anxious and in less emotional pain so I
don't think that there's a direct
relationship between being more
conscientious and less neurotic but I
think there's one that's mediated by the
environment and this is very interesting
you see because you'll hear all sorts of
social psychologists tell you and that
conservatives are more likely to be high
in negative emotion they're more threat
sensitive say than liberals but the
weird thing about that is is that the
conservatives are not higher in
neuroticism than liberals actually the
contrary happens to be true the Liberals
are slightly more neurotic than the
conservatives and so if conservatives
are threat sensitive because that's
supposed to be the theory then why the
hell don't they show up as being higher
in trait neuroticism and you could say
Well they're so effective at their
conservatism that they've reduced their
neuroticism by organizing their
environment and to some degree that's
true but Jesus if your theory predicts
one thing and the opposite happens to be
true you can't just post hawk say well
there's some other reasons we didn't pay
any attention to to account for that
like it's really bothered me because it
does seem to be the case that the
political landscape is shaped to some
degree by some sort of negative emotion
that's broadcast at the people who are
on the other side of the political
Spectrum but the evidence that it's
anxiety related seems to be very very
thin so the question is well what else
might there be so well conscientiousness
is related to depression uh and guilt
there's a a researcher named fard who
looked to show used a meta analys to
show that conscientiousness was
associated with specific emotions an
overall negative emotion but was most
strongly associated with guilt it was
most it was negatively related to guilt
experience but positively related to
guilt proness and so maybe guilt is the
emotion that you feel when you don't do
your duty something like that and that's
partly why we were thinking as well it's
part of it's not exactly why we were
thinking that conscientiousness is
motivated by uh inability to
tolerate inactivity but it's it's a
finding that's along the the same sort
of theoretical lays out the same sort of
theoretical territory so you must know
people maybe the maybe the person is
your mother or perhaps it's your father
they come over to your place or you go
over there and they're just working all
the time they can't sit down and relax
they just work all the time
and they say they'll tell you if you ask
them well I can't stand sitting around I
have to be doing something and you can
imagine too how that might have been
selected for Across The evolutionary
time span I mean if if you're living in
a situation where resources are somewhat
limited like we pretty much all do
you're going to want you're going to
demand of the people around you that
they at least pull their fair share of
the weight right and so you could
imagine that the people who were likely
to feel a negative emotion of some sort
for not chipping in and doing their
share or more than their share which
would be an way of indicating their
value to the community we more likely to
be well less likely to be less likely to
be selected as mates and also perhaps
more likely to be severely punished from
time to time now you might say well how
do people get away with not being
conscientious then well the answer to
that would be there are other things
that you can offer the community that
are of value that aren't associated with
dud beautifulness and I think comedians
are a good example of that I I don't
believe that comedians are particularly
conscientious because it's not the kind
of Lifestyle you would pick if you were
a conscientious person or people who go
out on the road and play music for
example because that's such an erratic
lifestyle and so unlikely to be stable
across any reasonable amount of time so
maybe you could be valuable to the
community by being amusing an extrovert
would do that or or by uh by helping
ensure security and safety and maybe
someone h neuroticism would do that or
maybe you would be useful because you're
really good at developing affiliative
relationships that would be someone who
is agreeable or you're creative but the
conscientious person demonstrates their
value by working hard and being dutiful
and contributing to the broader
community and and following rules and
all that sort of thing and there may be
other things they do as well so now
here's a downside to being
conscientious if
you're working in a big company say and
there's Mass layoffs and you happen to
be affected independently of your work
history the probability that you'll
become depressed is quite a lot higher
if you're conscientious and some of you
maybe conscientious people and you know
that if you fail at something or even if
you think you might be failing at
something you're going to tear yourself
apart you're going to find it you're
going to blame yourself for it because
conscientious people especially orderly
people are also judgmental right and so
which is something the Liberals always
accuse the conservatives of doing is
being judgmental and and laying down
their value structure on everything but
if you're conscientious you're going to
tend to assume that if things aren't
going well for you that it's your fault
and that's you can understand why that
might be a useful supposition when it is
the case that there's something you
could have done that would have
stabilized you or or improved your your
chances and you can often think of
something even if it's trivial but it's
not so good when you happen to be caught
up in you know waves of mass movement
for example when you're laid off by a
big company that where the relationship
between that happening and your own work
ethic is very very tenuous nonetheless
you'll still pull yourself apart
so all right so let's take a look at
orderliness because we don't have much
to say about industriousness because we
don't know anything about
industriousness but we're starting to
understand a lot about orderliness and
it's extremely interesting so we we'd
only managed to parse out orderliness
roughly speaking only managed to parse
out conscientiousness into orderliness
and industriousness over about the last
10 years I mean people have had placed
orderliness under conscientiousness
before that but psychometrically it's
become with the big five aspect scale
it's become more straightforward to
measure and so here's what we know about
orderliness so far it predicts
conservatism along with low openness low
openness is a better predictor of
conservatism and high openness of
liberalism than conscientiousness is but
conscientiousness is a pretty good
predictor and that's almost all
orderliness it's it's also associated
with disgusted sensitivity now that's a
very cool thing so um Jonathan height
has done a lot of work on discussed
sensitivity and so has a guy named Paul
Rosen and I knew their research from
really almost I guess it's almost 30
years ago now and I thought they were
really on to something back in the 990s
I really thought that investigating
disgust would be useful because no one
had ever really talked about it hadn't
conceptualized it as a separate emotion
system and we we found that that
discussed sensitivity is associated with
orderliness with the preference for
order and tradition and not with
egalitarianism it's also associated
orderliness with harsh judgments of
moral transgression and and this is the
kicker here I think it's associated with
the function of something that
psychologists have started to describe
as the behavioral immune system and so
we're going to talk about the behavioral
immune system and then we're going to
talk more speculatively I would say
about the role that the behavioral
immune system might play in political
choice and also in political pathology
and I find this overwhelmingly shocking
this this body of data because it's
opened up a view for me of why people
are prejudice that I had no idea existed
and it's it's make it actually makes
Prejudice a more terrifying thing I was
terrified about Prejudice before I knew
any of the stuff I'm going to tell you
about today but this makes it more
terrifying because it it locks it so
deeply into people you can't believe it
and the worse than that if you
understand why it's locked so deeply
into people you also understand why it
emerged as a necessity and that's the
terrifying thing now so we're stuck with
that now and no one really knows what to
do about it and so well we'll walk
through this and you can tell me what
you think so what's the behavioral
immune
system all right according to the
parasite stress hypothesis levels of
parasitic infection within a region may
drive variability at both individual and
societal levels okay so they're talking
about individual variability in
political attitudes in personality
traits both among individuals and both
in the social world and so we'll outline
that in some great detail the avoidance
of death or disability through avoidance
of infection is a major evolutionary
driving force for example until times
that are recent in evolutionary terms
almost 50% of children failed to survive
to reproductive age with the majority of
deaths being due to infectious diseases
now we're less cognizant of that as
modern people because of the invention
of
antibiotics which we are currently in
the process of destroying as rapidly as
we possibly can right because they're
given wide scale to animals and to
people to far too great a degree and all
over the world we're generating new
infectious diseases that are resistant
to antibiotics all known antibiotics and
we don't have any new antibiotics in the
pipeline so although we've had a 60 70
year Hiatus where infectious diseases
were well controlled they're they're
back on the March again and for example
there are multiple strains that have
emerged of antibiotic resistant
tuberculosis that can't be treated by
any known combination of antibiotics and
those are actually tend this is a
terrible thing they tend to be bred in
hospitals and my guess is if we did the
epidemiology properly that hospitals
kill more people than they save and the
reason they do that is because they
bring people together who have diseases
and they breed infectious disease of all
sorts that's antibiotic resistant it's
absolutely insane and here's another
thing we do that's completely crazy so
um if you bring cattle to a feed lot
they're fed this is particularly the
case in in the US but it's also the case
in Ontario um they're fattened up on
corn and the reason they're fattened up
on corn is because corn is heavily
subsidized as a as a crop so it's Dam
near free that's why there's corn syrup
in everything right because it's a very
lowcost a very lowcost source of
calories and you might say well hooray
you know a lowcost source of calories
isn't that wonderful because that means
that people don't have who have any who
don't have any money get to eat and
right fair enough but the subsidy is
made corn so cheap that you can you can
feed it to cows to fatten them up
because they get quite fat fast they
gain a lot of weight fast with corn the
problem is cows can't digest corn so it
makes them sick or they digest it very
badly it makes them sick they're not
designed for it they're designed to eat
grass not corn and so in order to stop
the cows from from dying when you feed
them corn you pump them full of
antibiotics and that's one of the things
that's breeding antibiotic resistance so
it's not very smart but that's what
we're doing and no one really notices
and that's a very bad idea so you can be
sure one of the things that you can be
virtually certain of is that whatever
you're worried about happening terribly
in the future it will be something else
that you're not worrying about that will
actually cause the problem and this
could certainly be one of those things
local parasite types and host defense
systems will typically typically be
involved in a co-evolutionary arms race
and so at any given time a host's
immunological defenses will be
specialized to be most effective against
local parasite species to the extent
that a host defense system is
specialized locally contact without
groups will be associated with an
increased risk of exposure to infectious
diseases against which there is no a
prior immunity okay I'm going to read
that again because you should think
about it to the extent that a host
defense system is specialized locally
contact without groups will be
associated with an increased risk of
exposure to infectious diseases against
which there is no a prior immunity black
plague Europe came in on ships right the
Europeans started to spread out they
came back with the ships the rats came
off the ships poof third of the European
population
died the relevant infection avoiding
behaviors such as avoidance of strangers
and high conscientiousness in for
example food preparation are assumed to
arise from the operation of a behavioral
immune system the behavioral immune
system comprises adaptive psychological
response mechanisms that are sensitive
to cues that might predict the presence
of infectious pathogens and which
respond with appropriate cognitive
processing and affective reactions such
a system this is the next thing that you
want to pay attention to such a system
is likely to be over sensitive the cost
of a false positive avoiding
non-existent infection is small relative
to the possible cost catching an
avoidable infection okay so you're
walking through the grass and your snake
detectors go off they're they're the the
F or the paraphobia of your eyes the per
periphery is specialized for the
detection of things that might threaten
you and so you could say well your snake
you have snake detection systems in the
periphery of your vision that are hypers
sensitive because if you see a stick and
you think snake and you jump up in the
air the cost is you jumped up in the air
so who cares that you misidentified the
snake but if there's a snake there and
you don't see it and it bites you then
you're dead so the logic is why not set
the systems that protect you to be hyper
sensitive because the cost of the hypers
sensitivity is low compared to the cost
of hyposensitivity right in Social
terms an important component of the
parasite stress hypothesis is that high
levels of infection may lead to
ethnocentrism xenophobia Trust of
different others and Conformity because
such behaviors will reduce the
likelihood of exposure to unfamiliar
infections to which immunity has not
been developed why is there strict
sexual morality because promiscuity is a
prime vector for disease transmission
that's one of the
reasons conservatism as the social
immune system discusted is considered to
be one of the basic human emotions
defined by a strong revulsion and desire
to withdraw from an eliciting stimulus
or event physically disgust is
accompanied by a distinct facial
expression involved con involving
constriction of the oral and na nasal
cavity so that's the disgust phase which
closes up your nose and your mouth so
that things can't get in evolutionary
models of disussed propose that this
emotion evolv to help us avoid
contaminated or harmful foods or other
potential sources of disease such as
sexual contact you know there's lots of
psychoanalytic theories about sexual
shame and sexual disgust but it's much
more straightforward as far as I'm
concerned to view it as a biological
battle there's approach systems and
sexual arousal systems that are involved
in moving you forward to towards a
sexual partner but there's disgust
systems that guard you against it and
those two things are mutually Regulatory
and so you're basically Stuck in the
Middle it's half move forward and half
be repelled and that's partly also the
balance of those two things is help is
what helps you select a sexual partner
and people generally are quite selective
about their sexual partner
so and we said well why are you
selective about your sexual partners
well there's the obvious practical
reasons but then there's the reasons
that are more more tightly associated
with biological protection and so even
though we don't like to think that
way in addition to its role in directly
helping to expel harmful foods from the
body discust also forms an important
component of the behavioral immune
system the suite of psychological
mechanisms that Aid in the detection and
avoidance of potential contaminants
before they can make contact with the
body although disgust may have its
origins in the protection to get
physical contamination a number of
Studies have implicated disgust
responses in moral decision-making
there's been experiments that are
specifically associated with the
elicitation of disgust and the
observation of the corresponding
behaviors in the lab so here here's an
example so imagine I gave you a
sterilized Beaker and I said well expel
some saliva into it now wait 10 seconds
and drink it with you well people no you
see you made a disgust face right well
the question is why right you know it's
sterile it was in your mouth seconds
before why all of a sudden have have
you've switched from it being part of
your body to not being part of your body
and also being part of your body that
what wasn't ingested it was was part of
you to being something that there's no
damn way you're going to have anything
to do with so
um well so that's a good example that's
a good example of the of the of the
discussed mechanism in in operation you
know distinguishing between self and
non-self is a very very difficult thing
and there's multiple mechanisms that do
it and it's it's definitely necessary
although disgust may have its origins in
protection against physical
contamination a number of Studies have
implicated disgust response disgust
responses in moral decision-making I
mean you know that you you can see the
activity of the uh behavioral immune
system in such simple things as avoiding
sources of contamination on a sidewalk
right if you see something that's
disgusting say rotting food or something
like that on a sidewalk the probability
that you're going to step in it is very
low you're going to see it and you're
going to make a face and you're going to
go around it and the reason for that is
because you don't want that attached to
you in any way and the reason for that
is well it's disgusting it's
contaminating and the association there
is that it's the a place where you could
conceivably pick up a disease now you
see pathologies of this system arise
generally obsessive compulsive disorders
so chronic handh for example is is
classified as an anxiety disorder but
there is an anxiety component to it but
I don't believe that that's an accurate
classification I think that obsessive
compulsive disorder is actually a
disorder of disgust because all of the
behaviors including hyper grooming
people sometimes have trania they'll
pull out the hairs on their body The
Grooming behaviors and that sort of
thing seem to be more associated with
the operation of the disgust system and
almost everything about obsessive
compulsive disorder has a discussed
basis and so one of the things things
that people who are who have OCD obsess
about is that I got a client once who
was this poor woman by the time her OCD
was done with her she' built the
equivalent of an airlock on her house
like not technically proficient or
anything like that and her husband and
her children had to go through an
elaborate decontamination process before
they were allowed to step foot in the
house and one of the things she was very
concerned about was that she would go
out to a supermarket and touch a piece
of fruit and and become contaminated and
then come home and touch her children
and then they would become contaminated
and so well she ended up in the in the
hospital and she was divorced and I I
just did in her life you know and so and
people who have obsessive compulsive
disorder you know they'll they'll wash
their hands until the soap is gone like
a whole bar of soap right and you can
often tell who they are because their
hands are shiny from washing too much
and they'll shower they can't get out of
the shower they'll shower until the hot
water is completely gone and you know so
the their their self-cleaning mechanisms
so to speak have gone seriously astray
and the way you treat them is by
exposing them to things that are
disgusting and contaminating um I had a
client with OCD once he was quite the
character and um I one of the things I
had him do was we would look for things
on the internet pictures of things that
really disgusted him it's not that much
fun by the way treating someone who has
OCD because I'm rather disgust sensitive
and and so that was also rather hard on
me so anyways we would look for things
on the internet that that he really
didn't like and then I'd print them out
and have them put them on his fridge
which he did not like at at all and he
would he would he had a bunch of other
problems and we got along quite well but
for a long time I treated him for about
3 years he would phone me like three or
four times a day because he had
obsessive compulsive disorder and just
swear at me like mad you know he just
swear I didn't get these messages he he
he'd phone me and he was just so mad at
me because I'd have him put these things
on his fridge you know and so he'd curse
and swear and yell at me and then 2
minutes later he would phone and
apologize and say he was really sorry
and hoped I would continue to see him
God that just went that just went on
forever but I felt sorry for the poor
guy you know he eventually ended up
getting a puppy um yeah yeah yeah see
you agreeable people oh a
puppy God unbelievable eh yeah anyways
that was good for him because he had to
go around and clean up after the puppy
but that that poor puppy it was quite
dominant and it oh the things that
happened to that poor guy so the puppy
would dominate him so he'd take it
outside to to take for a walk and he
wasn't a very skilled person in many
many ways um he had a very large number
of severe impediments and so but he
really liked this pupp he didn't have
any friends or anything like that and he
was supported by his aged mother and it
God it was just a catastrophe and he'd
go outside and try to walk the puppy and
the puppy would just sit down right
because it was doing dominant stuff and
he didn't know how to overcome it and
then these crazy people from across the
way who styled themselves as animal
rights activists started to harass him
he and they phoned up his mother and
told him that if they if if she didn't
take the dog away from that they
were going to come over and you know do
terrible things to him and then he got
harassed on the street and then he went
to a park with his dog and they came up
to him and pushed him on the car and
swiped his dog and ran off to the to the
SPCA and dumped it there and he had to
move away from his apartment and God it
was just it was just an absolute
catastrophe they had plenty of sympathy
for that damn dog but no sympathy
whatsoever for the guy you know it was
really it was really something anyways
the story ended happily weirdly enough
he got a he got a job with a woman who
used to be a psychiatric nurse who was
training dogs and she gave him a little
job setting up the dog training thing
and then he got to learn to train his
dog he lost like he was a thin guy to
begin with he lost like 30 lbs trying to
learn how to take care of this puppy it
was just I thought he was going to die
but there's no way he was going to give
up that dog and so anyways OCD it's
quite the bloody uh catastrophe so and
it's a good thing for someone who has
OCD to have a dog right because dogs are
messy and so there's all sorts of things
that are messy about them but you have
to kind of live with the mess like you
have to live with the mess if you're
going to have a child or if you're going
to have a partner of any sort you know
you can't let the orderliness part of
you get the upper hand so terribly that
it's impossible for you to live that's
what happens to girls who have anorexia
by the way you know how you get there's
this idea with regards to anorexia that
it's often High achieving girls who have
it well it's hyper conscientious girls
they get so disgust sensitive they can't
stand their own bodies and so for
example then they start being able to
look at their bodies properly and so
what they do instead of looking at their
whole body they they lose the ability to
do that they only can see parts of their
body and then they can't tell the
difference between a part that's healthy
and well-shaped and a fat part and so
anything that's that's that's what would
you call of dubious
anything that's hard to measure becomes
impossible to see so I had an anorexic
client at one point wasn't a very big
woman maybe about this big and and thin
yes obviously and so I was trying to
work with her on her body perception
disorder and one of the things I did was
so I had her come and sit beside me so I
was sitting like this and so was she and
I said well you look at our two thighs
which one is bigger and like mine was
like 40% bigger and she said well I
can't tell they look the same to me and
so I said okay this is what we're going
to do I let her do it I said you take a
pencil and I'll sit on a piece of paper
and you just trace my thigh okay and
then you can put that piece of paper
underneath your thigh and trace it and
then you can look at the difference well
so I had her do that and she looked at
the two pieces of paper and she couldn't
believe it she could not believe that
that was actually the case because her
perception had become so disordered that
it was impossible for her to see the
real shape of her body and we we would
go outside and I would ask her you know
is that person thin is that person fat
and with other people she could tell but
with her own body not a chance she
couldn't see it properly at all and so
there's a real obsession with Purity
among women who have anorexia no they'd
like to starve themselves right down to
the bone because the bone is sort of
pure and white and there's no excess
tissue on it and so anorexia also looks
like a disease of disgust and so it's
very very difficult to she she thought
in very black and white terms one of the
things I I had her do at one point was
said she has a music she said I really
like a song or I don't like it at all
and I said okay well you've got a music
collection why don't you go through like
20 of those songs and rate them on a
scale from one to 10 and she couldn't do
it it was either yes or no orderly right
the boundaries around the categories
were absolutely segregated and and her
apartment tended to be decorated in
black and white and she was hyper clean
you know so everything in the apartment
was extraordinarily orderly well put
away she couldn't stand to see anything
disgusting on the counters and that sort
of thing so very very difficult disorder
to treat anorexia very very difficult so
and you know you can see how it can go
wrong
because food you know when you're eating
your disgust systems are on alert you
know like you you want the thing you
want to eat and you absolutely don't
want the thing you don't want to eat and
your mouth is very sensitive to that
sort of thing you know to the texture
and all of that and your sense of smell
is very sensitive to that sort of thing
because you know you don't want to eat
anything that's contaminated or
poisonous so it's another situation like
sex where the reward system is driving
you forward for to to engage in a
consumatory behavior but the discusted
system is right there Mo modulating and
moderating it and there's a tension
between those two things that's already
always at work with the anorexic types
the discuss sense discust system gets
the upper hand so she was also
extraordinarily judgmental and
perfectionistic but that goes along with
it because orderly people are judgmental
and perfectionistic and so if you're
you're a perfectionist often what that
means is you have very high levels of
orderliness and very high levels of
neuroticism and those two things Chase
each other around like mad because you
can't stand the idea that you would make
a mistake and you get anxious about it
as well so then you get stuck in this
perfectionistic mindset and you can't
get out of it
so inducing disgust responses whether
via a foul order a disgusting work
environment or recalling a disgusting
experience LED individuals to assign
harsher punishments to others who had
committed moral trans transgression so
you you describe a moral transgression
maybe breaking a law you expose person
the the people in the experiment to some
disgusting stimulus and then you have
them you ask them about the probability
that the person was guilty and then also
how long they should be imprisoned or
how much they should be fined and if you
get the people disgusted then the
probability especially if they're
orderly then the probability of of
assigning a harsh punishment goes upward
so so if you're ever in court don't
discuss the judge right that's part of
the deal harsher moral consump judgments
can even be induced following the
consumption of a bitter drink because
bitter bitter substances are often
poison or poisonous substances are often
bitter and that induces a disgust
response as well although you can
overcome that coffee is bitter olives
are bitter so you can you can retrain
your system to accept those things as
food but it's not particularly
easy in in addition the same discussed
related facial expressions are observed
in resp response to unpleasant tastes
disgusting photographs and receiving
unfair treatment in an economic
game concerns about cleanliness and
interesting so some of you may know I
was at McMaster University a couple of
weeks ago and there were a bunch of
protesters there and I went up to to
meet the protesters because I kind of
wanted to see what would happen there
were a bunch of them around the end the
back of the room and I offered to shake
their hands and mostly what I got was
disgust faces you know and that's not
good that's not good so here's something
to know too here's here's a good
predictor of whether or not you're going
to get divorced you go into the
therapist office and you talk the two of
you talk and you roll your eyes that'll
predict if you roll if you're rolling
your eyes at your partner you're going
to divorce them why it's a disgust
response right it's something like I'm
lifting you up with my eyes and throwing
you into the garbage it's something like
that but eye rolling is a great
predictor of the probability of divorce
so so it's something to keep in mind
with regards to your relationships like
if you're starting to develop some
contempt or some disgust
you bloody well better get on that right
away because that's a bad road to go
down and so well
so well so then you have to do whatever
you have to do not to go down that
road yeah so see one of the things I
think that's happening on the political
landscape and like we know for example
that the more authoritarian politically
correct types are high in agreeableness
and high in orderliness so that's a very
interesting combination and I think
what's happening is that they're very
rapidly dividing the world into
contemptible Predator like a snakes
often elicit a disgust response right a
predator will will elicit a disgust
response like a crocodile or an
alligator a snake or something like that
and so it's the it's the Predator
response that's being evoked to the
people who are on the other side of the
political Spectrum roughly speaking and
so they're categorized as like contempt
Predators something like that and the
people that are being protected are like
innocent victims it's it's that's how it
appears and that's a very very dangerous
to have happen as I'll show you concerns
about cleanliness and feelings of
disgust have likewise been related to
political attitudes situational
reminders of the importance of physical
cleanliness such as asking participants
to wipe their hands with antiseptic
wipes tend to increase self-reported
political conservatism such as find
finding is consistent with the notion
that Purity tends to be valued more
highly by conservatives than by liberals
individuals who report being disgusted
more easily also tend to hold more
conservative political views on topics
including abortion gay marriage tax cuts
and affirmative action in addition to
the effects that have emerged when using
self-reported disgust sensitivity more
conservative political views have also
been associated with stronger
physiological reactivity to disgusting
images there's a lawyer Martha nusom
who's also a political philosopher who
says that we should eliminate the effect
of disgust on our political theorizing
that disgust shouldn't be something
that's considered as a valid means of
information from which you might drive
derive political conclusions so if I
find your behavior disgusting or if you
find my behavior disgusting according to
NAS bom that should be independent you
should try to make that rationally
independent of your political views I'd
like to believe that but there's a
problem and this is the problem that
we're going to go through you can't mock
about with these underlying systems you
can't just say ignore the reports of
your discust system because it isn't it
isn't like your emotions are insane and
irrational and you have the rationality
on top of that that's guiding you
properly that isn't how it works all of
these underlying biological systems
guide you and to the degree that you're
the degree to which you're guided
properly is a consequence of the balance
of the action of these underlying
biological systems but the balance is
very complexly maintained you need a
discusted system because if you didn't
you'd eat something that would kill you
and then you would die or you'd do
something stupid and you'd end up like
you you'd get cut and it would be dirty
and you wouldn't clean it and then you
would die so the idea that you can
somehow just rationalize the output of
the discussed system and decontaminate
your political viewpoints as a
consequence seems to me to be un it
seems to me to be very very naive not
that there's no danger to it because
there's plenty of danger to it in
addition a large literature has
converged on the notion that there are
two core dimensions of conservative
political ideology resistance to change
and tolerance of
inequality resistance to change refs the
extent to which people wish to maintain
the status quo while tolerance of
inequality reflects the acceptance of an
unequal distribution of resources and
opportunities within Society Jo has done
a lot of that work
Jo's supervisor is maerin banaji and Ma
maerin banaji is a known Marxist and so
this is another place where political
ideology contaminates as far as I'm
concerned scientific inquiry because
Jo's work on on uh on let's say
resistance to
is predicated on the idea that the
conservative in the conservative
inclination to support the maintenance
of already existing structures is
precisely equivalent to supporting an
unjust system and that's not a
reasonable thing to do if you're looking
at these sorts of things from a
scientific perspective you don't get to
make judgments like that but they're
built into the
questionnaires so resistance to change
reflects the extent to which people wish
to maintain the status quo while
tolerance of inequality reflect reflects
the acceptance of an unequal
distribution of resources and
opportunities within Society these two
Dimensions appear roughly aligned with
social and economic conservatism as
expressed in the constructs of
right-wing authoritarianism and social
dominance orientation respectively there
is no left-wing authoritarian
psychological scales we're trying to
derive one right now but the reason for
that is that after World War II the
social science Community was responding
to what had happened in Nazi Germany and
perfectly appropriately and they
examined rightwing authoritarianism as a
consequence but they never examined
left-wing authoritarianism because the
prevailing what would you call it
political landscape of the time
prescribed made the idea that there
could be left-wing authoritarianism
sufficiently incorrect politically so
that it was never analyzed from the
perspective of social science even
though the evidence for left-wing
authoritarianism say by the end of the
1940s was absolutely overwhelming right
by the 1930s people were reporting on
what had happened in the Soviet Union
you know the forced the forced
dekulakization for example of the
agricultural industry in the Soviet
Union and the consequence death
consequent deaths of several million
people in the Ukraine was all
extraordinarily well
documented these core facets of
conservatism are also closely related to
the two higher order value dimensions
described in moral foundations Theory
which reflect preferences for order and
tradition on the one hand and
preferences for egalitarianism on the
other important ly the motivational
basis of these two Dimensions appears to
vary independently from one another with
an individual's overall political
attitudes on a left right Spectrum
emerging from their relative
balance these motives are also strongly
Ro rooted rooted in basic personality
characteristics such that preferences
for order and tradition are associated
with higher levels of orderliness now
you might think that's obvious right
well obviously orderliness is associated
with preference for order that's not the
issue the issue is whether or not you
can measure it right that's the issue so
these things seem self-evident but it's
taken a very long time to build up the
instruments that allow them to be
measured in such a way that you can also
start to look at the correlates and the
underlying
psychophysiology so it's it's by no
means
obvious um higher levels of orderliness
an aspect of conscientiousness and
politeness an aspect of agreeableness as
well as lower levels of openness and
intellect in contrast preferences for
egalitarianism are uniquely associated
with compassion an aspect of
agreeableness so and that's exactly what
we found when when we were looking at
political correctness which is primarily
predicted not by openness or by
conscientiousness but by
agreeableness political conservatism can
therefore be thought of as a social
immune system reflecting the extension
of pathogen avoidance mechanisms to the
Integrity of the social system borders
boundaries right that's the orderly
person we'll keep borders between
Concepts we'll keep borders between
people we'll keep borders between
between towns will keep borders between
political ideas and religions and States
why because we don't want the Terrible
Things flooding in from everywhere now
the liberal will say wait a minute all
the things flooding in from everywhere
aren't terrible they have great utility
and that's true but the problem is
they're both true they're both true at
the same time because well and and we'll
document that as we move forward so then
the question is well how do you know
when things should be more open and when
things should be more closed and the
answer to that is well you better have a
chat with everyone and find out what
they think because it's a balance of
probabilities there's no way of
determining at a priority it's a balance
of probabilities and so you have to have
a discussion to determine how wide the
gates should be open and how narrow they
should be closed and that's also going
to depend on the circumstances and the
situation so there's no way of the thing
this is the thing that's so terrible
about this there's no way of determining
a prior whose position is
correct just as the behavioral yes in
particular the social immune system
system would help to maintain order by
suppressing any actions or individuals
that deviate from a group's accepted
social traditions it has been reported
for example that regions with higher
levels of disease prevalence tend to be
associated with higher levels of social
Conformity and autocratic rule
individuals who feel more vulnerable to
disease likely likewise report higher
levels of ethnocentrism and xenophobia
such basic concerns about pathogen
avoidance May thus contribute to the
desire for order and tradition among
conservatives along along with the harsh
moral judgments associated with
violations of the social order how do
you purify something how about with fire
that's something to keep in mind as we
move towards the more political
expressions of this and the thing about
something that's disgusting is you don't
isolate it exactly you destroy it right
you it's the thing you do with rats and
insects for example is destroy them
right and you do that with poison you do
it with fire you do it by cleaning
things up and you do that because well
the rats EAD all your crops and the in
carry disease and all of that so or they
infest your food which which you know I
don't know what proportion of today's
food production is eaten by rats and
insects but it's a huge proportion
still according to the parasite stress
hypothesis authoritarian governments are
more likely to emerge in regions
characterized by a high prevalence of
disease causing pathogens now who the
hell would have ever guessed that this
is where you see the real utility of a
genuine social science because it's by
no means self-evident this hypothesis
and this paper that I'm going to discuss
with you right now just blew me away
when I read it I thought it should have
been Front Page News across across the
world but didn't really attract that
much attention recent cross National
evidence is consistent with this
hypothesis but there are inferential
limitations associated with that
evidence we report two studies that
address some of the limitations and
provide further tests of the hypothesis
study one revealed that parasite
prevalence strongly predicted
cross-national differences on measures
assessing individuals authoritarian
personalities so that's very interesting
so the more parasitic and transmissible
diseases in a particular local the
higher the probability that people when
measured at the individual level held
authoritarian attitudes because you
might say well there's parasite
prevalence that produces a repressive
government but it doesn't really affect
people at the level of personality and
that's not what was found in the studies
it was reversed the parasite prevalence
SL infectious diseases made people more
authoritarian and that was what was
driving the more authoritarian
government so here's something cool who
knows about this right so how do you
fight authoritarian governments across
the world you get rid of infectious
disease that could be it that could be
the key so and then again that that is
by no means a self-evident
hypothesis study one that revealed that
parasite prevalence strongly predicted
cross-national differences on measures
assessing individuals authoritarian
personalities and effect statistically
mediated the relationship between
parasite prevalence and authoritarian
governance parasites personality
authoritarian State that's the causal
pathway this mediation result is
inconsistent with alternative
explanations for previous findings to
address further limitations associated
with cross-national comparison study 2
tested the parasite stress hypothesis on
a sample of traditional smallscale
societies results revealed that parasite
pre prevalence predicted measures of
authoritarian governance and did so even
when statistically controlling for other
threats to human welfare one additional
threat famine also uniquely predicted
authoritarianism together these results
further substantiate the parasite stress
hypothesis of authoritarianism and
suggest that societal differences in
authoritarian governance result in part
from cultural differences in individuals
authoritarian personalities here's the
effect sizes so look they're they're
mindboggling so first that's
authoritarian governance One path
prevalence the correlation
is42 42 right there's malnutrition
there's Warfare It's actually negatively
correlated with Warfare famine. 26 so if
you square that that's about 8% of the
variance that's about 16% of the
variance so those are walloping effect
sizes right that effect size is about so
that's 16% the typical effect size for a
personality variable is about 0. 2 to3
so let's say 0.25 so that's about 7% of
the variance that's 16 to 177% of the
variance you almost never see a
correlation of that size so it's a it's
an absolutely remarkable piece of
work and it has all sorts of terrifying
implications so the question is now why
would you have such a powerful immune
system behavioral immune system
discussed system okay so let's look at
some little known facts about the
history of North America I don't know
how many of you guys know this but it's
worth knowing okay so what was the the
pre-colombian population of the Americas
the answer is we don't really have any
idea the estimates vary from 10 million
to 100 million with an emerging
consensus of 50 million well it's
halfway okay we don't know we could be
out by one order of magnitude but a fair
number of people so what happened to all
the Native Americans well that's easy
they all died why because when the
Spaniards came see there was no diseases
in the new world except for maybe
syphilis there's some evidence that
syphilis was
transmitted back to Europe as a
consequence of contact with North North
and South America but there were almost
no diseases in in in in the Americas and
that's partly because there were no big
cities and also because even where there
were not compared to Europe and also
because where there were big cities in
Europe people lived close with animals
and there was lots of movement of
disease pathogens back and forth between
the animals and the human beings and so
lots of Europeans died as a consequence
of that like huge numbers of them
especially from diseases say like small
plocks or or measles or and but the
Europeans built up a whopping immunity
to all these diseases including
influenza and then they came to the
Americas with their diseases and bang it
killed all the Native Americans it
figured 90% of them so here's some of
the statistics what were the diseases
that wiped them out influenza Bubonic
plague small poox measles they even
chickenpox was deadly to the Native
Americans so from 1492 to 1650 there was
a death toll of
90% so you know when the Puritans landed
in the US at Plymouth Rock that was a
long time after the Spaniards had had
landed in in in the more Southern areas
the Indians the Native Americans there
they were desperate to see them because
they didn't have enough people to take
off their crops they didn't have enough
people left imagine nine out of 10
people died that's everyone right you're
done at that point and so there were 20
to 25 to 30 million people in Mexico
before the arrival of a Cortez 50 years
later there were 3 million so and the
Aboriginal population in Canada
estimates this is accepted by the
Canadian government no one really knows
and the estimates do vary substantially
there might have been 500,000 people in
Canada in 1450 and that decreased by 80%
after contact with the Europeans there's
the population collapse in Mexico 16th
century population collapse in
Mexico so the 1545 and 1576 epidemics
appear to have been hemorrhagic fevers
caused by an indigenous viral agent and
aggravated by unusual climatic
conditions the Mexican population did
not recover recover to prehispanic
levels until the 20th century absolutely
catastrophic consequences so then you
look at that and you think well is it
really all that surprising that people
have evolved extraordinarily powerful
immune systems disgust responses and
behavioral immune systems I mean this is
no joke it's absolutely catastrophic so
now I want to talk to you a little bit
about Hitler so when I was
sorting some of this stuff out trying to
look at the this discust sensitivity
literature and then understanding
finally that it was associated with
orderliness and that orderliness was
associated with conservatism I was also
reading a book by Adolf Hitler which was
called Hitler's tabl talk it's a very
interesting book and Hitler had the
secretaries at his dinner tables from
1939 to 1942 and they basically took
shorthand notes of what he said
spontaneously and so there's a book that
you can buy called Hitler's table talk
that that that is nothing but a
presentation of his spontaneous
utterances across that time period now
Hitler was a very strange person um he
was very high in openness surprisingly
enough but also extremely high in
orderliness at least that's that's what
you can infer from reading the
historical data so he bathed four times
a day for example he was also a great
admir of willpower so which is something
that's also associated with
conscientiousness and orderliness so he
was very proud of his ability to stand
like this for eight hours in the back of
a car and his ability to withstand you
know what would you call them trying
circumstances by willpower alone one of
the most famous film documentaries that
was made in the Nazi area was called
Triumph of the will right Triumph of
Willow that was by Len riffin stall I'm
not saying that quite right you can look
at that on YouTube it's a very
interesting film a horrifying film but a
very interesting one well if you're
wondering about orderliness I mean take
a look at that man so that's nberg right
that was the biggest rally grounds ever
made in human history nurg and Hitler
was unbelievably good at spectacle look
at how absolutely perfectly ordered that
is there's God only knows how many
people there several hundred thousand
cuz they could all fit on the parade
ground at the same time all in
absolutely perfect
formation orderliness gone out of
control it's interesting because people
think about Nazism Nazism as a descent
into barbarity right but what it looks
like is a disease of civilization that's
a whole different thing because
conscientiousness predicts be predicts
success in complex industrial societies
and this is actually conscientiousness
gone out of control on the orderly end
of things and why why well the 20s the
the World War I that was plenty chaotic
and there was a huge famine after World
War I right in Spanish influenza killed
more people than the war did and it
actually mutated in the trenches because
if people are packed close together then
viruses or other pathogens can be very
deadly because you don't have to live
very long to give it to her if people
are dispersed then the the virus or the
bacteria can't afford to kill you fast
because then it dies too and so if you
pack people together then you can breed
unbelievably virulent forms of pathogens
infectious pathogens and that's what
happened in World War I packed all the
men together in unsanitary conditions
poof up came Spanish influenza went all
around the world after World War I and
killed more people than the war so and
after the war after World War I of
course Germany descended into utter
chaos and so what happens when you
descend into chaos and the answer is
there's a corresponding call for order
and that was answered by the that was
answered by Hitler and the national
socialists and Hitler was very good at
listening to the German population and
what they were demanding in the period
of chaos was order and so that was
exactly what he decided to provide
spectacles of order which is exactly
what you'd expect from someone who is
really high in openness and high in
orderliness right spectacles of order
and Hitler was also extremely interested
in art but he categorized art into like
proper hygienic art and improper chaotic
art and he often would have art
exhibits at the same time of the
approved art that he approved of so
those were in the official museums let's
say and then there would be a
corresponding exhibit of degenerate art
and that that was art that was
associated with movements like
expressionism for example which has
garish colors and it's very emotionally
expressive Hitler sort of preferred kind
of eroticized Greco Roman
representations of heroic people you
know that was the Nazi aesthetic a
essentially so there are some more
examples of order right look at that
everything everything geometric
everything regular the border is
completely well defined everything here
is squares everyone's lined up perfectly
everything is uniform right look at
there's Pathways between the the rows of
people this is again at
nurg perfect order along with his plans
for the world Capital Germania Albert
Spear that was the Nazi architect made
the plans for the world's largest
stadium which was to be located on the
nberg rally grounds derived from the
panthic stadium of Athens it would have
offered 400,000 seats it was to get the
shape of a horseshoe planned Dimensions
800 M wide 450 M High 100 met with a
building area of 350,000 square meters
the laying of the foundation stone was
on 9th of July 1937 it was to be
finished for the party Congress of
1945 in 38 the construction began with
the excavation it was stopped in 39 but
during the whole War the casting pit had
to be kept dry from entering groundwater
after the war the northern half of the
pit filled up with water and is today
called Silver sea Silver Lake the
southern half was used to deposit the
debris of the destroyed downtown
nurg that's nberg at night so what
Hitler did because he was very good at
using fire and light as display as well
so those that curtain there so you see
there's the nurg buildings that we saw
in the last photograph that those are
the search lights from the from the Nazi
Air Force so they had the marade all the
way around the the the grounds there and
pointed straight up so that the
nighttime rallies were illuminated by a
a cube of light very effective um what
display artistic display of
orderliness now here's where things get
seriously ugly so this is a this is a
pamphlet from I think 19 yeah
1944 and the pamphlet is called
uh Jew as World parasite so this is
something I found on the net I'll share
it with you very rare original Late 1944
anti-jewish Third Reich pamphlet this
varies scarce 6 by 8 and 3/4 20page soft
cover booklet by EML rifer and Eric
schwarzburg was published 1944 in
Frankfurt it was published at a time
when a great percentage of the European
Jews had already been deported to
concentration camps in the East perhaps
to justify what had happened to the Jews
since the Nazi seizure of power the
authors compare the Jews with parasites
the most unpleasant forms of life on
Earth and that it is only natural and
just to fight against them to free
Humanity of them for the sake and
survival of
mankind this is from the pamphlet the
people of the world will recognize that
Jew is World parasite and there will be
a time when there will be one united
front of all people against the Jewish
World parasite the pamphlet ends and
Humanity will be freed from the most
severe illness from which it suffered
from thousands of years here's what
happened in Nazi Germany so when when
when Hitler came to power he was very
interested in public health campaigns
and so he set he he formulated a number
of policies including formulating these
uh vans that went around screening
people for tuberculosis at the same time
he announced announced a policy to
beautify and purify Germany and so he
encouraged the factory owners to clean
up the factories to get rid of the rats
and the insects and to plant flowers and
so forth in front right so it was
cleanliness and Beauty they used zeyon b
as the agent for for disinfect in the
factories zeyon b zeyon b was the gas
that was used in the gas Chambers so
Hitler started out by getting rid of the
rats and the parasites and the insects
in Germany along with his Public Health
campaign then he moved into the insane
asylums and started a euthanasia
campaign and then he moved outside into
the broader political sphere and started
to target the people that he didn't
consider pure as parasites capitalizing
on the behavioral immune system and
people's intrinsic sense of disgust and
so I'm going to show you some of the
propaganda that did that so that you
know how sort of thing
works okay so this is from Richard
Kingsburg who wrote a book called Hit
Hitler's idology embodied metaphor
fantasy and history so we've already
we've already sort of discussed the idea
this is sort of an archetypal idea uh
grounded in biology you know that you're
you're run in some sense on this
underlying biological platform of deeply
rooted hypothalamic systems in the melic
systems and so forth that that and that
you're a a collection of those
underlying systems organized at some
higher order level while those
underlying systems manifest themselves
in fantasy so for example if you're
hungry you're going to get a fantasy
about going to get something to eat and
if you're lonely you're going to get a
fantasy about someone that you'd like to
be with and so forth because the fantasy
is part of the manner in which these
underlying biological motivation systems
think okay so what do you think how do
you think and talk if you're possessed
by disgust okay the state did this is
this is these are from Hitler's Hitler's
utterance
the state did not possess the power to
master the disease the menacing decay of
the Reich was manifest the masses feel
that the mere fact of the Jews existence
is as bad as the plague politicians
tinkering around on the German national
body saw at most the forms of our
general disease but blindly ignored the
virus at the time of the unification the
inner Decay was already in full swing
and the general situation was
deteriorating from year to year the
nation did not grow inwardly healthier
but obviously languished more and more
it's all disease metaphor it's all
disease metaphor the symptoms of decay
of the pre-war period can be reduced to
racial causes anyone who wants to cure
this era which is inwardly sick and
rotten must first of all summon up the
courage to make clear the causes of the
disease they think that they must
demonstrate that they are ready for
appeasement so as to stay the deadly
cancerous ulcer through a PO policy of
moderation the Jew must take care that
the plague does not die if this battle
should not come would Decay and at best
would sink to Rune like a rotting corpse
you can see in the Reich today an
example of mortal Decay that is not the
speech of someone who's possessed by
anxiety that's the speech of someone
who's possessed by disgust they're not
the same
thing the 1st of May can only be the
liberation of the nation's Spirit from
the infection of internationalism the
restoration to health of peoples against
the infection of materialism against the
Jewish pestilence we must hold a loft a
flaming ideal another purification
metaphor the restoration to health of
our people must start from the
restoration to health of the body
politics so that was Hitler's essential
metaphor the the nation was a body right
it was a pure body it was a pure Aryan
body and it was being assaulted by
parasites that were subjecting it to
disease and Decay that's the fundamental
metaphor at the bottom of his political
message
I gave the order to burn burn down to
the raw flesh Jesus the ulcers of this
poisoning of the
wells yeah pretty rough
man this is the battle against a
veritable World sickness which threatens
to infect the peoples a plague which
devastates whole peoples an
international pestilence the
international carry of the basilis must
be fought it is with if within this
community one state is infected that
infection is decisive for all in Europe
Europe no common life of the Nations is
possible when amongst their number there
are some who are suffering from a
poisonous infection and who openly Pro
profess their desire to infect others
with the same disease we shall have a
very in real interest in seeing to it
that the bulist plague does not spread
over Europe national socialism has made
our people and therefore the Reich
immune from a bevic
infection I'll read you one more
although obviously you get the point
table seven is called the National body
is being
consumed the Jew is and Remains the
typical parasite of sponger who likes a
like a noxus billus keeps spreading as
soon as a favorable medium invites him
all right now I want to show you a brief
film and you can you can look here at
the at the what would you call it
artistic and propagandistic
transformation of the idea of order into
a politicized message and the thing
that's so interesting about Hitler's
particular brand fascism it wasn't
precisely an uh see it it wasn't
precisely a movement that was predicated
on ideas like communism communism was
predicated on ideas but the Nazis went
at it with something that wasn't really
in the realm of idea it was more in the
realm of like embodied disgust and image
and so it was also very much more
difficult to fight against from the
ideational perspective you know it
wasn't a well-developed intellectual
movement it was an embodied movement and
Hitler was extraordinarily good at using
the metaphors and the images and then
his incredible capacity for for
propagandistic display to fire people up
at a level of analysis that they weren't
really even aware of so let's take a
look at this film
[Music]
for
the campaign in Poland gave us the
opportunity to really get to know the
Jewish people
nearly 4 million Jews live here in
Poland but they won't be found among the
rural
population nor have they suffered from
the chaos of War as has the native
po they set it out indifferently in the
gloomy streets of the Polish
[Music]
ghetto within an hour after the German
occupation they were back in business
[Music]
we Germans had a look at the Polish
ghetto 25 years ago this time our eyes
are sharpened by our experience in the
last few decades
unlike in 1914 we no longer see just the
most grotesque and comical of these
questionable ghetto figures this time we
recognize that there's a plague here a
plague that threatens the health of the
Arian
peoples rard Wagner once said the Jew is
the demon behind the corruption of
mankind and these pictures prove it
[Music]
Jewish Home life reveals remarkable lack
of creative ability to civilize
in plain language Jewish dwellings are
filthy and
neglected these Jews aren't at all poor
after Decades of business they've
hoarded enough to acquire decent
comfortable
homes but they live for Generations in
the same dirty and bug ridden
dwellings untroubled by their
surroundings they go right on with their
prayers the bobbing motion is part of
the ritual for reading Jewish scriptures
[Music]
part of Jewish so-called Community Life
takes place in the
[Music]
street the connection with trade you
know you see what's going on in the okay
so with the ju deposition of those two
films you see the jux deposition of
order versus chaos and so part of the
order versus chaos archetype obviously
is is rooted in the dichotomy between
disgust and Purity it's not the only
it's not the only axis of O opposition
between Order and Chaos and then so this
is all invocation of archetypal chaos
and it starts with the the the the use
of the disease imagery and then also the
use of uh music composed in a minor key
and threatening and low right so that's
all josed together and then they switch
to trade again with the this undertone
of threat and there's a hand-to-hand
exchange of goods and it seems to me
that they're they're using the image to
continue the metaphor that in this
situation trade is associated with
contamination rather than with
productivity right and so you and you
can see obviously a dichotomy with
regards to trade because when you're
taking goods from someone else the
question is are the goods of high
quality and useful and are they useful
are they something that is going to
introduce a foreign element or or an
unexpected element into your house and
so this film is obviously taking the the
that ambivalence that's associated with
trade and placing it into the chaos
order archetype and then associating it
with disgust so it's very very sneaky
and it's not done it's done by inference
rather than directly which I think is
much more powerful way of doing this
sort of
[Music]
thing and one of the things that's
interesting too is that you know you can
imagine that if you're if if you're
seeing people who are poor and
downtrodden that that might evoke two
possible sets of responses one might be
a compassionate response and that would
be the desire to help right and the
other would be the desire to distance
yourself of course you feel the same
thing for example if you're walking down
blur and you find somebody who's you
know a completely wrecked Street person
lying there in their sleeping bag in a
doorway it's like well what's your
response going to be is it Compassion or
is it is it fear is it disgust well it's
going to depend on your mood and all
sorts of other things it's going to
depend on the particulars of this
situation it's going to depend on your
temperament but you can see that those
two things they're both automatically
evocable responses and it isn't
self-evident which one is going to come
to the four nor is it always
self-evident which one should come to
the four because part of the reason that
you're ambivalent about a situation like
that is because you have no idea what
would happen even if you did choose to
interact and so you can't just
simply what would you say there's no
simple way of solving a problem like
that and so that's why why there's a war
of competing emotions when you're in a
when you're in a situation like that but
you could imagine as well you could have
taken the same images and put them to
different music and used a different
overlay and it could have been a call to
compassion but that's not what it is
here it's a call to contempt and
extermination because that's also
another danger of I suppose insisting
upon the fact that a a given population
is victimized I suppose that might be
way of one one way of thinking about it
because there's two different sets of
categorical responses to people who are
at the bottom of the dominance hierarchy
and one of them is compassion but the
other one is more like this it's not
necessarily something that you want to
carelessly evoke
[Music]
one might want to regard these haggling
children as a sign of great
poverty but watch them a while and it
becomes clear that they're proud to act
as their grown-ups
do these young people don't have the
idealism that ours
do with them the egoism of the
individual is not in the service of
higher common
goals instead Jewish Morality In crass
contradiction of the Arian concept of
Ethics proclaims the unrestrained egoism
of every Jew to be Divine
Law his religion makes cheating and
usury a
duty in the fifth book of Moses for
example it is stated that a non-jew thou
May loan to upon usury but not th
brother that the Lord May bless thee in
all thy
dealings for the Jews then doing
business is something
holy this is totally incomprehensible to
non-jews Arian man attaches a sense of
Worth to every
activity he wants to create something
worthwhile food or clothing houses or
machines and so there's a contrast there
they actually use a contrast there
between industrious and non- industrious
too which is quite interesting works of
art or anything else of value to
everyone he's ruled by the feeling of
being responsible for his achievements
[Music]
for the Jew there's but one thing of
value
money how he gets it makes no
difference the first trade goods are
generally worthless trash of All
Sorts that's how the little Jews start
out
soon they reached the point where they
can sell from a tray and before long
they've assembled a complete line of
[Music]
goods not long after they own a regular
stand the most ambitious soon own a
small shop and then a bigger
[Music]
shop the most cunning
that is the most unscrupulous eventually
have warehouses and Banks and move into
the most Splendid mansions in the cities
provided that they don't get in each
other's way as in the narrow ghettos of
the
[Music]
East that's why they try to escape to
Rich lands with rich people
[Music]
they need other so in the next part of
the film there's another something else
that's done implicitly so you'll see a
globe and then there's spread of um of
migration and the underlying metaphor
there is again the spread of disease
peoples because they need the Wares with
which to do
business creative Aran peoples find a
value has been reduced by the Jew to
Mere
merchandise he buys and sells but
produces
[Music]
nothing the production he leaves to the
workers and farmers of the host
nation it's funny there there's an echo
of marxist ideology in there too that's
very interesting because what they're
the
the the insistence is that the the labor
that goes into basic production
qualifies as labor but the labor that
goes into Mercantile activity doesn't
qualify as labor at all it's not like
the Nazis were Pro capitalist by any
stretch of the imagination so there's
this strange distinction drawn between
like it's almost like physical
production that seems to be something
that's valued it's the use of your
musculature say but then as soon as it's
elevated up into trade which is
obviously a value added process I mean
that that's almost self-evident but it's
put forward here as something that's
only that's only uh parasitical that's
right that and that's a commonality with
with the Marxism of the
time the Jews are a people without
Farmers or workers a race of
[Music]
parasites wherever the body of a Nation
shows a wound they anchor themselves and
feed on the decaying
organism they make business out of the
sickness of the
Nations and therefore Endeavor to deepen
and prolong all conditions of
sickness how it is in Poland and was in
Germany the Jews have been this way
throughout their entire history their
faces bear the AG old features of the
Perpetual sponger the Eternal Jew who in
the course of time and worldwide
wanderings has always been the
same there's no difference between these
Jews in Poland and those in
Palestine though the two are
geographically separated
[Music]
Palestine is the spiritual center of
international jewry though the Jews are
numerically insignificant
there here at the Wailing Wall they
gather and mourn the fall of Jerusalem
[Music]
their homelessness though is a matter of
choice and in keeping with their entire
history 4,000 years ago their Hebrew
ancestors were already
wandering out of the land of Two Rivers
they wandered along the sea to
Egypt where they ran a lucrative grain
business for a while when the country
farmers and other Egyptians Rose against
the foreign usurers and speculators they
wandered once more and plundered their
way to the promised land they settled
there mercilessly looting the culturally
Superior rightful
inhabitants here in the course of
centuries from the Oriental Far Eastern
racial mixture with negroid admixture
the ultimate mongrelized Jews
developed foreign from us Europeans born
of totally different racial elements
they differ from us in body and above
all in
Soul we probably would never have been
bothered by them had they stayed in
their Oriental
home but the Cosmopolitan Empire of
Alexander the Great reaching from the
near east across half the
Mediterranean and especially the
boundless World Empire of the Romans
brought about the evolution of the trade
and migratory traits of the Jews who
soon spread across the open
Mediterranean area while some of them
said settled in the large Urban traffic
and Trade Centers of the
Mediterranean others wandered
relentlessly on across Spain France
Southern Germany and
England everywhere they made themselves
unwelcome in Spain and France the people
Rose openly against them in the 13th and
14th centuries and they wandered on
mainly to Germany
[Music]
there they followed the path of the
Arian
culture creative Germans colonizing the
East till they finally found a gigantic
new untapped Reservoir in the Polish and
Russian sections of Eastern
Europe so well let's let's tie that
together we talked about the use of
archetypes archetypes in
stories we talked about the the
relationship between archetypal
symbolism and the biological
underpinnings of the human
psyche and then you can see that
manifesting itself in this sort of
propaganda in the political positions
that come out of it you tap into the
archetyp archetypal Dimension that's
chaos versus order you can you can place
one against the other however you want
from a propagandistic perspective
because you could make a film decrying
excessive order that that's not a
difficult thing to do but that isn't
what happens here Order is associated
with the sun and with what's good and
with honest labor and with Purity and
with health and chaos is associated with
Decay and disgust and and impurity and
also with trade which is extremely
interesting and the trade Dynamic you
could see that in the second part of the
film there there was a there was the
implication that it was involvement in
trade that was associated with this
pathological spread right and so trade
is that's another reflection of of the
ambivalence towards the transgression of
borders is trade a good thing or is it a
bad thing well that's always a political
issue it's a huge political issue right
now right you're going to have
internationalist trade or you're going
to close the borders you're going to
have internationalist trade and open it
or you going to close the borders and so
the degree to which the borders should
be open or closed I think generally
speaking is the prime political question
and of course we're going through an
absolute convulsion of that sort of
argumentation again right now part of
the reason I I wanted to show you this I
mean there's a variety reasons I wanted
to show you um how the how the archetype
and the underlying biology are are
tightly Associated but I also wanted to
show you how those associations can be
hijacked essentially and used for
propagandistic and political purposes
because you need to know that because
these sorts of things have a very
powerful they have the capacity for a
very powerful emotional appeal and the
only possible way of resisting that I
would say and and avoiding the
temptation of allowing extraordinarily
complex issues to be catastrophically
reduced to there to to principles that
are far too simple to do them Justice is
to become at least aware to some degree
of what the mechanisms for the
production of such propaganda are and
why they have such potency then you have
at least some ghost of a chance of
reducing your own what would you call it
proclivity we could even call it a
temperamental proclivity to the kind of
propagandistic information that happens
to suit your temperament best so well we
all know the aftermath of this sort of
thing right was Absol abolutely Dreadful
and we're by no means out of the woods
on that yet you know you see in Europe
and in the United States increasingly
calls
for the the nationalistic enclosure of
borders again you saw that with Trump
and the building of the wall between
Mexico and the United States so these
things can get very badly out of hand
and it's a it's a very bad idea to allow
things to swing too far to one way or
too far to the other because all hell
breaks loose when you do that and well
all right we'll see you on Thursday
[Applause]